---
title: '100 Days of code - Creating my personal Harry Potter universe'
date: 2018-07-23
permalink: /posts/2018/07/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - cool posts
  - python
  - coding
---

# 100 days of coding - improving my coding skills

I have decided to take on a new habit using a technique I found on the ['get discplined' subreddit](https://www.reddit.com/r/getdisciplined/). The technique works as follows:
- Take a piece of paper or card
- Draw 6 vertical lines intersecting 6 horizontal lines. This creates a 7x7 grid of 49 squares
- Choose a daily habit you want to work on and write it down on the back of the card
- Also put down WHY you want to work on the habit
- Start working on the habit TODAY!
- Every day, put a big fat red X into the corresponding square

You can find the post [here](https://www.reddit.com/r/getdisciplined/comments/1x99m6/im_a_piece_of_shit_no_more_games_no_more_lies_no/cf9dz72/).

As one of my new habits I chose: "Code for 15 minutes every day". Since I want to continuously work on my programming skills, making coding a daily habit seems like the perfect idea. I have always wanted to participate in the '100 days of code challenge' that was talked about in one of the "Talk Python To Me" podcast episodes a while back. Therefore, I will start today. However, different to the original challenge, I will also count coding related tasks to the coding challenge. For example, reading a post about decorators would also count.

I will put all code into [this GitHub repo](https://github.com/zotroneneis/100_days_of_code) and I will keep track of what I worked on in this blog post.

Let's Go!

---
## Day 1, July 23rd 2018
I want to start with using some of the stuff I learned from the "Python Tricks" book. Therefore, I will start creating a little 'Harry Potter universe' with classes and methods related to the Harry Potter world (I LOVE Harry Potter). Today my code includes the following concepts:   
- Object orientation / two classes: HogwartsMember, Pupil
- I used inheritance for the pupil class
- I used the @property decorator
- I created a static class method
- I used function annotations (Python 3 feature)

## Day 2, July 24th 2018

Today, I digged a little deeper into the ```@property``` decorator, how it is related to the ```property()``` function and how its getter and setter methods work. These two links ([link1](https://www.programiz.com/python-programming/property), [link2](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/17330160/how-does-the-property-decorator-work)) were really helpful. Of course, there is also the [official Python docs](https://docs.python.org/3.7/howto/descriptor.html) on the ```property()``` function.

In the Python Tricks book I already learned about the functioning of decorators. I also knew that ```@property``` is a way of creating a read-only property. However, I was curious about its relation to ```property()``` and the setter and getter methods. The most important things I learned:

Creating a read-only property with ```@property``` is just a different way of using the ```property()``` function. So when considering our Harry Potter classes, using

```
@property
def name(self):
    return self._name
```

Is equivalent to
```
def name(self):
    return self._name

name = property(name)
```

The full signature of the ```property()``` function is ```property(fget=None, fset=None, fdel=None, doc=None) -> property attribute```. ```fget``` is a function for getting the value of the attribute, ```fset``` is a function for setting the value of the attribute and ```fdel``` is a function for deleting the attribute. All these arguments are *optional*. So we can create a property object like we did above. But we can add extra "power" to it by specifying a setter, getter and/or deleter
method. For example, we could use the setter method to implement certain constraints on the property value. Let's say we add an attribute about the OWL's (Ordinary Wizarding Level's) to our Pupil class:

```
class Pupil(HogwartsMember):

    def __init__(self, name:str, birthyear:int, house:str, start_year:int):
        ...
        self._owls = {'Study of Ancient Runes': False, 'Arithmancy': False, 'Astronomy': False, 'Care of Magical Creatures': False, 'Charms': False, 'Defence Against the Dark Arts': False, 'Divination': False, 'Herbology': False, 'History of Magic': False, 'Muggle Studies': False, 'Potions': False, 'Transfiguration': False}

    @property
    def owls(self):
        return self._owls
```

Now, if we want to update the OWL's of a student passed, we have to make sure that she/he actually passed the exam. Otherwise, the OWL can't be awarded. Let's implement that using a setter method.

```
    @owls.setter
    def owls(self, subject_and_grade):

        try:
            subject, grade = subject_and_grade
        except ValueError:
            raise ValueError("Pass and interable with two items: subject and grade")

        passed = self.passed(grade)

        if not passed:
            raise ValueError('The exam was not passed so no OWL was awarded!')

        self._owls[subject] = True

    @staticmethod
    def passed(grade):
        grades = {'O': True, 'P': True, 'A':True, 'P': False, 'D': False, 'T': False}
        return grades[grade]
```

In the next days and weeks I want to keep working on these concepts. My current TO DO list looks as follows:
- Add ```__str__``` and ```_repr__``` methods
- Add class methods
- Add getter and deleter methods for properties
- Incorporate Python's abc module
- Create Exception hierarchy and own exception classes

Let's wrap up what I worked on today:
- Digged deeper into ```@property``` and ```property()```
- Added ```dict.get()``` method which returns default value if key does not exist
- Used another static method


## Day 3, July 25th 2018

Things I worked on today:   
   
**1. How to use function annotations for arguments that have a default value.**   

Specifially, I wanted to add an optional "pet" attribute to the Pupil class (as some pupils have a pet and others don't). I found a clear explanation in [this post](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/38727520/adding-default-parameter-value-with-type-hint-in-python).

In short, the syntax is as follows:
```
def __init__(..., pets: tuple = None):
    ...
```

**2. Where to put spaces when using function annotations.** As mentioned in [PEP8](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/?) the proper usage of spaces is as follows:

Function annotations should use the normal rules for colons and always have spaces around the -> arrow if present. 

Yes:

```
def munge(input: AnyStr): ...
def munge() -> AnyStr: ...
```

No:

```
def munge(input:AnyStr): ...
def munge()->PosInt: ...
```

When combining an argument annotation with a default value, use spaces around the = sign (but only for those arguments that have both an annotation and a default).

Yes:

```
def munge(sep: AnyStr = None): ...
def munge(input: AnyStr, sep: AnyStr = None, limit=1000): ...
```

No:

```
def munge(input: AnyStr=None): ...
def munge(input: AnyStr, limit = 1000): ...
```

**3. I added a ```__repr__``` method to both classes** that returns a useful string representation of an object

**4. I added a ```@property.deleter``` method** for the OWL's property in the Pupil class


## Day 4, July 26th 2018

Today, I added two new classes to the Harry Potter universe - one for creating professors, the other for creating ghosts. Also, I implemented a few **class methods** to use them as alternative constructors.

### Types of methods
A class can have three types of methods: instance methods, class methods and static methods.
   
**Instance methods** are the most common type of method. They take at least the parameter *self* as an input. This parameter points towards an instance of the class when the method is called. An instance method can modify both *object state* and *class state* (the latter can be modified through ```self.__class_```_)
   
**Class methods** take at least the parameter *cls* as an input. *cls* points towards the *class* - not a particular object instance - when the method is called. Therefore, a class method can only modify *class state* but not *object state*. Still, changing the class state will still affect all instances of the class. 
   
**Static methods** take neither a *self* nor *cls* parameter as an input. Therefore, they cannot modify neither object state nor class state. Although they are related to the class, they are independent of the other class or instance methods and can only access the data they are provided with.
   
Class and static methods allow a developer to communicate what intention she/he had in mind when implementing the method. For example, using a static method expresses that the method is independent from everything else around it. Also, class methods can be used as **alternative constructors **.   
   
### Class methods as alternative constructors   
   
- In Python a class can only have one constructor (the ```self.__init__()``` method)
- However, we can use ```@classmethod``` to create factory functions
- These factory functions allow us to create class objects that are configured exactly the way we want them
- In this way, they act like additional constructors
   
For example, we probably want to create the main characters of the Harry Potter world. Typing all the names and other attributes every time would be very slow. Adding a few class methods allows us to speed up the process. We can create a Harry constructor as follows:
   
```
@classmethod
def harry(cls):
    return cls('Harry James Potter', 1980, 'male', 'Griffindor', start_year=1991, pet=('Hedwig', 'owl'))
```


## Day 5, July 27th 2018
